Essence of Linear Algebra (#357)
3b1b/3Blue1Brown.com: public/content/lessons/2016/cross-products/index.mdx

Here, I'll try to hit the main points that students are usually shown about the cross product, and in the next chapter I'll show a view which is less commonly taught, but really satisfying when you learn it.

## Two dimensions

We'll start in two dimensions. If you have two vectors, $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ and $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, think about the parallelogram that they span out. What I mean by this is that if you take a copy of $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$, and move its tail to the tip of w, and you take a copy of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, and move its tail to the tip of $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$, the four vectors enclose a certain parallelogram.

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogram.svg" 
/>

The cross product of $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ and $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, written with the x-shaped multiplication symbol ($\times$), is the area of this parallelogram.

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramFormula.svg" 
/>

> Well, almost, we also need to consider orientation. Basically, if $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is on the right of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, then $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ cross $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is positive and equal to the area of that parallelogram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well, almost, we also need to consider orientation.  If $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is a counterclockwise rotation away from $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, then $\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is positive and equal to the area of that parallelogram.
```

Reviewer: I realize the phrase "to the right of" is a little confusing when the vectors are upside down. It's also not exactly how I think about it in my own head (I'm curious how you do). Instead what's relevant is which direction one vector would need to rotate to get to the other, when opting for the shorter rotation.

Maybe "is a counterclockwise rotation away from" is also clunky, I'm open to suggestions!

Author: I agree that "to the right of" is a bit confusing. I typically think in terms of "clockwise rotation" and "counterclockwise rotation", which is what I'll change it to for now.

However, what do you think of the terminology: 

- "If $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ comes before $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ in a clockwise direction, then..."
- "If $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ comes after $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ in a clockwise direction, then..."

I think a student would be right to object that both are true, but maybe using *before* and *after* encodes some sense of the smaller rotational arc indicating which one we mean.

Author: After changing it to "counterclockwise" and "clockwise" I think it reads pretty well.

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramPositive.svg" 
/>

> But if $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is on the left of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, the cross product is negative 1 times the area of that parallelogram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But if $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is a counterclockwise rotation away from $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$, the cross product is $-1$ times the area of that parallelogram.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramNegative.svg" 
/>

Notice, this means order matters. If you swap $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ and $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, and instead consider $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ cross $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$, the cross product becomes the negative of whatever it was before.

$$
\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}} = -\vec{\mathbf{w}} \times \vec{\mathbf{v}}
$$

> The way I always remember this is that when you take the cross product of the two basis vectors in order, i hat cross j hat, the result should be positive. In fact, the order of your basis vectors is what defines orientation. So since i hat is on the right of j hat, I remember that v cross w is positive whenever w is on the right of v.

Reviewer: Again, let's replace the words "i hat" throughout with "$\hat{\imath}$", and "j hat" with "$\hat{\jmath}$"

> The way I always remember this is that when you take the cross product of the two basis vectors in order, i hat cross j hat, the result should be positive. In fact, the order of your basis vectors is what defines orientation. So since i hat is on the right of j hat, I remember that v cross w is positive whenever w is on the right of v.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way I always remember this is that when you take the cross product of the two basis vectors in order, $\hat{\imath} \times \hat{\jmath}$, the result should be positive. In fact, the order of your basis vectors is what defines orientation. So because $\hat{\jmath}$ is a counterclockwise rotation away from $\hat{\imath}$, I remember that $\mathbf{v} \times \mathbf{w}$ is positive whenever $\mathbf{w}$ is a counterclockwise rotation away from $\mathbf{v}$.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/BasisVectorsSign.svg" 
/>

> So for example, with the vectors shown here, I'll just tell you that the area of that parallelogram is 7. And since v is on the left of w, the cross product should be negative, so v cross w is -7.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, with the vectors shown here, the area of that parallelogram is 7 (You'll see how to compute this below). Because $\mathbf{w}$ is a counterclockwise rotation away from $\mathbf{v}$, the cross product should be negative, so $\mathbf{v} \times \mathbf{w} = -7$.
```

Author: Since it's been flipped a couple of times in my head and now for the lesson. Should this read "clockwise" and not "counterclockwise"?

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramCalculation.svg" 
/>

**Given the diagram below:**

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramQuestion1.svg" 
/>

<Question
  question="Is the cross product $\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ positive?"

>   choice1="true"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  choice1="yes"
```

>   choice2="false"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  choice2="no"
```

  answer={1}
>

> The cross product $\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is positive since $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is on the right of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cross product $\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is positive since $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is a counterclockwise rotation away from $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramQuestion1Answer.svg" 
/>

</Question>

**Given the diagram below:**

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramQuestion2.svg" 
/>

<Question
  question="Is the cross product $\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ positive?"

>   choice1="true"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  choice1="yes"
```

>   choice2="false"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  choice2="no"
```

  answer={2}
>

> The cross product $\vec{\mathbf{w}} \times \vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is negative since $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is on the left of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cross product $\vec{\mathbf{w}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is a _clockwise_ rotation away from $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/two-dimensions/AreaOfParallelogramQuestion2Answer.svg" 
/>

</Question>

## Compute with determinant

> Of course, you want to be able to compute this without someone telling you the area and this is where the determinant comes in from <LessonLink id="determinant">chapter 5</LessonLink>. For the 2d cross product $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ cross $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, you write the coordinates of $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ as the first column of a matrix, write the coordinates of w as the second column, then you compute the determinant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, you want to be able to compute this without someone telling you the area. This is where the determinant comes in from <LessonLink id="determinant">chapter 5</LessonLink>. For the 2d cross product $\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$, you write the coordinates of $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ as the first column of a matrix, write the coordinates of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ as the second column, then you compute the determinant.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/compute-with-determinant/ComputeCrossProduct.svg" 
/>

This is because a matrix whose columns represent $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ and $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ corresponds with a linear transformation that moves the basis vectors i hat and j hat to $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ and $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$. 

<Figure
    image="./figures/compute-with-determinant/ChangeOfArea.svg"
    video="./figures/compute-with-determinant/ChangeOfArea.mp4"
    show="video" 
/>

The determinant is all about measuring how areas change due to a transformation, and the prototypical area to look at is the unit square resting on i hat and j hat. After the transformation, that square turns into the parallelogram we care about. So the determinant, which generally measures the factor by which areas are changed, gives the area of this parallelogram, since it evolved from a square that started with area 1. 

<Figure
    image="figures/determinant-basis-vectors-transformed-orientation.png" 
    caption="TODO: replace with image callback from chapter 5"
/>

> What's more, if $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is to the left of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$, it means orientation is flipped during the transformation, which is what it means for a determinant to be negative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What's more, if $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is a _clockwise_ rotation away from $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$, it means orientation is flipped during the transformation, which is what it means for a determinant to be negative.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/compute-with-determinant/DeterminantNegative.svg"
    video="./figures/compute-with-determinant/DeterminantNegative.mp4"
    caption="Since the orientation is flipped, the determinant is negative."
/>

<Figure
    image="./figures/compute-with-determinant/DeterminantPositive.svg"
    video="./figures/compute-with-determinant/DeterminantPositive.mp4"
    caption="Since the orientation isn't flipped, the determinant is positive."
/>

### Determinant example

<Figure
    image="./figures/determinant-example/DeterminantExample.svg" 
/>

> As an example, if $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ has coordinates $\begin{bmatrix}-3\\1\end{bmatrix}$, and $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ has coordinates  $\begin{bmatrix}2\\1\end{bmatrix}$, the determinant of the matrix with those coordinates has columns is $(-3)\cdot1 - 2\cdot1$, which is $-5$. So evidently the area of the parallelogram they define is $5$, and since $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is to the right of $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ it should make sense that this value is negative.

Reviewer: Instead of the phrase "the determinant of the matrix...", just write this as an equation in a line below.

<Figure
    image="./figures/determinant-example/DeterminantTransformation.svg" 
    video="./figures/determinant-example/DeterminantTransformation.mp4"
/>

I'd recommend playing around with this notion a bit in your head to get an intuitive feel for the cross product.

<Question
  question="What is result of of $\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ where $\vec{\mathbf{v}} = \begin{bmatrix}1\\-2\end{bmatrix}$ and $\vec{\mathbf{w}} = \begin{bmatrix}4\\3\end{bmatrix}$?"
  choice1="5"
  choice2="-11"
  choice3="11"
  choice4="10"
  answer={3}
>

> We can start by visualizing the two vectors in space:

Reviewer: Although it's nice to have the visuals, I wouldn't want to imply to the reader that they need to visualize it. Maybe first just show the straightforward way to answer, maybe with some reminder of a way to mentally picture the determinant computation.

Then, since you already made all the imagery, you could add below something like "We can gut check our answer by drawing the diagram, and seeing if 11 feels like a reasonable area, and whether it makes sense that it's positive"

Author: I agree that changing it to a straightforward answer makes sense. I think I was trying to be mindful of the fact that in the "standard view" section we go away from computing the cross-product as the determinant.

<Figure
    image="./figures/determinant-example/DeterminantExampleQuestion1.svg" 
/>

We know the cross product is equal to area of the parallelogram formed by the two vectors and since $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ is on the right of $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ we also know the result will be positive.

<Figure
    image="./figures/determinant-example/DeterminantExampleQuestion1Parallelogram.svg" 
/>

To compute the cross product calculate the determinant of the transformation matrix $\left[\begin{array}{cc} 1 & 4 \\ -2 & 3\end{array}\right]$.

<Figure
    image="./figures/determinant-example/DeterminantExampleQuestion1Calculation.svg" 
/>

</Question>

## Properties

For example, you might notice that when two vectors are perpendicular, or close to being perpendicular, their cross product is larger than it would be if they were pointing in a very similar direction, because the area of that parallelogram is larger when its sides are perpendicular. 

<Figure
    image="./figures/properties/BiggerSmaller.svg"
    caption="$\vec{\mathbf{v}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}}$ is bigger when the vectors are more perpendicular to eachother and smaller when the vectors are pointing in a similar direction."
/>

> Something else you might notice is that if you scale up one of the vectors, perhaps multiplying $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ by $3$, then the area of that parallelogram is scaled up by a factor of three, so $(3\vec{\mathbf{w}})$ cross $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$ will be exactly three times the value of $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ cross $\vec{\mathbf{w}}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Something else you might notice is that if you scale up one of the vectors, perhaps multiplying $\vec{\mathbf{v}}$ by $3$, then the area of that parallelogram is scaled up by a factor of three, so $(3\vec{\mathbf{w}}) \times \vec{\mathbf{w}} = 3 (\vec{\mathbf{w}} \times \vec{\mathbf{w}})$.
```

<Figure
    image="./figures/properties/Scaling.svg" 
/>

## 3d cross product, standard view

> Now, even though everything we just did is a perfectly fine mathematical operation, what I just described is technically not the cross product. The true cross product is something that combines two three-dimensional vectors to get a new 3d vector. You still consider the parallelogram defined by the two vectors, and the area of that parallelogram still plays a big role. To be concrete let's say that area is 2.5 for the vectors shown here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, even though everything we just did is a perfectly fine mathematical operation, what I just described is technically not the cross product. The true cross product is something that combines two 3d vectors to get a new 3d vector. You still consider the parallelogram defined by the two vectors, and the area of that parallelogram still plays a big role. To be concrete let's say that area is 2.5 for the vectors shown here.
```

<Figure
    image="figures/3d-area-of-parallelogram.png" 
/>

> But as I said, the cross product is not a number, it's a vector. This new vector's length will be the area of that parallelogram, which in this example is 2.5, and the direction of that new vector is perpendicular to that parallelogram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 3d cross product does not return a number, it returns a vector. This new vector's length will be the area of that parallelogram, which in this example is 2.5, and the direction of that new vector is perpendicular to that parallelogram.
```

<Figure
    image="figures/3d-resulting-vector.png" 
/>

<!--TODO: lock orientation of the axis so that the two views are identical-->

> But which way, right?  There are two possible vectors with length 2.5 pointing perpendicular to a given plane. This is where the right hand rule comes in. Point the forefinger of your right hand in the direction of v, stick out your middle finger in the direction of w; then when you point up your thumb, that's the direction of the cross product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But which way?  There are two possible vectors with length 2.5 pointing perpendicular to a given plane. This is where the right-hand rule comes in. Point the forefinger of your right hand in the direction of v, and stick out your middle finger in the direction of w. Now when you point up your thumb, that's the direction of the cross product.
```

<Figure
    image="figures/3d-righthand-rule.png" 
/>

> For example, let v be the vector with length 2 in the z direction, and let w be the vector with length 2 in the y direction. The parallelogram they define in this simple example is actually a square, since they're perpendicular, and the area of that square is 4. Using the right hand rule, their cross product should point in the negative x direction, so this cross product is -4*(i hat).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let v be the vector with length 2 in the z direction, and let w be the vector with length 2 in the y direction. The parallelogram they define in this simple example is actually a square, since they're perpendicular, and the area of that square is 4. Using the right hand rule, their cross product should point in the negative x direction, so this cross product is $-4 \hat{\imath}$.
```

<Figure
    image="figures/3d-simple-example.png" 
/>

## Computing

> There is a formula you could memorize for this cross product, but it's common and easier to instead remember a certain process involving the 3d determinant.
> 
> <Figure
>     image="figures/computing-formula.png" 
> />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a formula you could memorize for this cross product:

<Figure
    image="figures/computing-formula.png" 
/>

However, it's common and easier to remember a certain process involving the 3d determinant.
```

> Now, this process looks truly strange at first. Write a 3d matrix where the second column is the coordinates of v, and third column is the coordinates w. Then for the first column, write in the basis vector i hat, j hat and k hat. Then, you compute the determinant of this matrix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process looks truly strange at first. Write a 3d matrix where the second column is the coordinates of v, and the third column is the coordinates w. Then for the first column, write in the basis vector $\hat{\imath}$, $\hat{\jmath}$, and $\hat{k}$. Then, you compute the determinant of this matrix.
```
